Update instructions for adding a SemIR instruction. (#4348)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: toolchain/docs/adding_features.md

Each parse node kind requires adding a `Handle<kind>` function in a
`check/handle_*.cpp` file.

### Adding a new SemIR instruction

If the resulting SemIR needs a new instruction:

-   Add a new kind to [sem_ir/inst_kind.def](/toolchain/sem_ir/inst_kind.def).

    -   Add a `CARBON_SEM_IR_INST_KIND(NewInstKindName)` line in alphabetical
        order

-   Add a new struct definition to
    [sem_ir/typed_insts.h](/toolchain/sem_ir/typed_insts.h), such as:

    ```cpp
    struct NewInstKindName {
        static constexpr auto Kind =

>             // `Parse::SomeId` should be some type from `parse/node_ids.h`,
>             // specifying the kind of parse nodes for this instruction.
>             // - `Parse::NodeId` if it can be any kind of parse node.
>             // - `Parse::InvalidNodeId` if no associated parse node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            // `Parse::SomeId` should be one of:
            // - A node ID from `parse/node_ids.h`,
            //   specifying the kind of parse nodes for this instruction.
            // - `Parse::NodeId` if it can be any kind of parse node.
            // - `Parse::InvalidNodeId` if no associated parse node.
```

Note partly suggesting to change this to read as a list of alternatives, but also to say "node ID" instead of "type", particularly since "type" has a different meaning on an Inst.

But also, if someone is just joining and looks at `parse/node_ids.h`, I'm concerned they may not be able to figure out what to put here -- although that technically defines the node IDs, they aren't actually listed there. Maybe something like "The new kind added to `inst_kind.def` above, suffixed by `Id`" might be easier for someone in the common case.

Author: These are references to parse node kinds not instruction node kinds, but I think I get your point and added some text.

            InstKind::NewInstKindName.Define<Parse::SomeId>(

>                // the name used in textual IR
>               {.ir_name = "new_inst_kind_name"}
>                // Other parameters have defaults

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                // The name used in textual IR:
                {.ir_name = "new_inst_kind_name"}
                // Other parameters have defaults.
```

Since you're editing this, maybe we should fix punctuation... but also, why the uneven indent?

            // - `Parse::NodeId` if it can be any kind of parse node.
            // - `Parse::InvalidNodeId` if no associated parse node.
            InstKind::NewInstKindName.Define<Parse::SomeId>(
                // The name used in textual IR:
                {.ir_name = "new_inst_kind_name"}
                // Other parameters have defaults.
            );

        // Optional: Include if this instruction produces a value used in
        // an expression.
        TypeId type_id;

        // 0-2 id fields, with types from sem_ir/ids.h or
        // sem_ir/builtin_kind.h. For example, fields would look like:
        StringId name_id;
        InstId value_id;
    };
    ```

    -   [`sem_ir/inst_kind.h`](/toolchain/sem_ir/inst_kind.h) documents the
        different options when defining a new instruction, as well as their
        defaults, see `InstKind::DefinitionInfo`.
    -   If an instruction always produces a type:

        -   set `.is_type = InstIsType::Always` in its `Kind` definition;
        -   when constructing instructions of this kind, pass
            `SemIR::TypeId::TypeType` in as the value of the `type_id` field, as

>             in:

Reviewer: When I look at https://developers.google.com/style/lists#types-of-lists, I see examples like:

> Here's a sequence of steps to follow:
> 
> 1. Open the box.
> 2. Remove the bobcat from the box.
> 3. Feed the bobcat.

To reflect that structure here, I suggest:

```suggestion
        -   Set `.is_type = InstIsType::Always` in its `Kind` definition.
        -   When constructing instructions of this kind, pass
            `SemIR::TypeId::TypeType` in as the value of the `type_id` field, as
            in:
```

Let me know if I'm missing something in the style guide, though.

            ```
            SemIR::InstId inst_id = context.AddInst<SemIR::NewInstKindName>(
                node_id, {.type_id = SemIR::TypeId::TypeType, ...});
            ```

    -   If an instruction produces a value used in an expression, but not one
        that has an ordinary type, you can make a new builtin type for its
        output. This is rare, but used, for example, when an expression
        implicitly uses a value as part of SemIR evaluation or as part of

>         desugaring. We have builtin types for bound methods, namespaces,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   Although most instructions have distinct types represented by instructions like `ClassType`, we also have builtin types for cases where types don't need to be distinct per-entity. This is rare, but used, for example, when an expression
        implicitly uses a value as part of SemIR evaluation or as part of
        desugaring. We have builtin types for bound methods, namespaces,
```

Do also bear in mind that `type` is also a builtin type.

        To get a type id for one of these builtin types, use something like
        `context.GetBuiltinType(SemIR::BuiltinInstKind::WitnessType)`, as in:

        ```
        SemIR::TypeId witness_type_id =
            context.GetBuiltinType(SemIR::BuiltinInstKind::WitnessType);
        SemIR::InstId inst_id = context.AddInst<SemIR::NewInstKindName>(
            node_id, {.type_id = witness_type_id, ...});
        ```

    -   Instructions without types may still be used as arguments to
        instructions.

Once those are added, a rebuild will give errors showing what needs to be
updated. The updates needed, can depend on whether the instruction produces a
type. Look to the comments on those functions for instructions on what is
needed.

Instructions won't be given a name unless
[`InstNamer::CollectNamesInBlock](/toolchain/sem_ir/inst_namer.cpp) is called on
the `InstBlockId` they are a member of. As of this writing,
`InstNamer::CollectNamesInBlock` should only be called once per `InstBlockId`.
To accomplish this, there should be one instruction kind that "owns" the
instruction block, and will have a case in `InstNamer::CollectNamesInBlock` that

> visits the `InstBlockId` recursively. That instruction kind will typically use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
visits the `InstBlockId`. That instruction kind will typically use
```

Recursion is invariably an oversight. That should be fixed; added a note to toolchain tasks.

    };
    ```

    -   [`sem_ir/inst_kind.h`](/toolchain/sem_ir/inst_kind.h) documents the
        different options when defining a new instruction, as well as their
        defaults, see `InstKind::DefinitionInfo`.
    -   If an instruction doesn't have a `type_id`, it won't produce a value,

>         and so won't be given a label when formatted, and can't be the argument

Reviewer: "won't be given a label when formatted"

What do you mean by "label"? My best guess would be an instruction name, but my understanding was that instructions always have names (even just %.loc).

Author: I switched to say name. Instructions without type_ids do get a name, but if it is used I think it indicates that there is an error.

Author: I've deleted this bullet and updated the comment before `type_id` above, and added a different bullet saying types are not required to be the argument to an instruction.

>         of another instruction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        and so won't be given a label when formatted, and can't be used for an expression operand.
```

Instruction arguments don't broadly need to be typed, only when there's an expression at play. Maybe this should be more specific?

Author: I've deleted this bullet and updated the comment before `type_id` above.

    -   If an instruction always produces a type, so it sets
        `.is_type = InstIsType::Always`, then its `type_id` field will be set to

>         `SemIR::TypeId::TypeType`.

Reviewer: `.is_type` indicates whether the `type_id` is set to `TypeType` (`Never`/`Maybe`/`Always`), but it doesn't cause the value of `type_id` to be set; instead, it mainly adds safeguards and changes some lowering logic.

What's the nuance you're trying to get at here? Above there's the reference to inst_kind.h, which has more detail.

Author: I've revised the text to hopefully make my point more clearly.

    -   If an instruction produces a value, but not one that can be used in an

>         expression, you can make a new builtin type for its output. For example,

Reviewer: I thought namespaces had types because they could show up in expressions as part of name lookup, but never have values. Also, aren't bound methods and witnesses used as part of expressions?

To be sure, I would expect most people shouldn't be adding builtin inst kinds, as noted by the comments there. They're definitely an edge case.

Author: I agree it isn't common, but
a) if it does come up, you'd be happy to know how to do it
b) existing instructions you might read about use this feature at times
c) it isn't clear what criteria is being used to decide when to make a new builtin type instead of an instruction without a type id
d) I personally would like the deeper understanding that includes edge cases rather than just recipes for common cases.

type. Look to the comments on those functions for instructions on what is
needed.

> If the instruction owns references other instructions, add a case to

Reviewer: What does "owns references" mean? Do you mean if an instruction has an InstBlockId?

Author: Updated the text to add more detail.
